Surface defect detection plays an important role in the product quality control process. Studies with non-graph neural networks (GNNs) often yielded suboptimal spatial reasoning due to irregular defect patterns. Meanwhile, recent GNNs with superpixel graphs (SGs) included unnecessary topology, such as normal surfaces and background, leading to confusion about the defect parts. In this work, we aim to propose a novel GNN that focuses solely on the semantic topology of surface defects to enable precise detection and support product quality decisions by offering its distinguishing defect-relevant SGs. The proposed model is built on a contrastive game strategy by formulating random walks with rebounds within the contrastive learning framework during GNN training. Specifically, the proposed strategy is embedded in GraphSAGE to dynamically select the defect-relevant graph topology among surface defects and distinguish them from extraneous parts at each epoch. In this work, the proposed model was evaluated on three public datasets for surface defect detection cases. The evaluations include an ablation study of the proposed model configuration, analysis of noisy texture, low-contrast defect edges, and subtle-size anomaly. Surprisingly, the proposed model significantly outperformed state-of-the-art models in terms of effectiveness and efficiency. In addition, the proposed model is considered a new explainable artificial intelligence method to support product quality control systems in decision-making.
